sft-reasoning/README.md, before:

# SFT Reasoning: Finetuning Trinity-Mini on Triton Traces

This folder contains the script for finetuning the `arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini` model on verified reasoning traces for PyTorch → Triton kernel translation.

## Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         INPUT: Reasoning Traces                        │
│                                                                         │
│  Source: gpt-oss-120b generating Triton kernels from PyTorch           │
│  Format: PyTorch → <think>reasoning</think> → Triton                   │
│  Quality: Verified correct AND compiled on Modal H100                  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                    │
                                    ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      FILTERING CRITERIA                                 │
│                                                                         │
│  ✅ correctness == True    (kernel output matches reference)           │
│  ✅ fast_0 == True          (kernel compiles & produces correct output) │
│  ⬜ fast_1 (optional)       (speedup > 1.0 - nice to have)             │
│  ⬜ fast_2 (optional)       (speedup >= 2.0 - nice to have)            │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                    │
                                    ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         SFT TRAINING                                    │
│                                                                         │
│  Model:    arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini (26B MoE, 3B active)                  │
│  Method:   QLoRA (4-bit quantization + LoRA adapters)                  │
│  Format:   Conversational (User: PyTorch, Assistant: Think + Triton)  │
│  Trainer:  SFTTrainer from HuggingFace TRL                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Files

| File | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `finetune_trinity.py` | Main finetuning script (Jupyter notebook style) |
| `pyproject.toml` | Python dependencies (uv) |
| `README.md` | This file |

## Prerequisites

1. **Generate Traces**: Run the orchestrator to generate reasoning traces:
   ```bash
   cd ..
   python orchestrator.py
   ```
   This creates `reasoning_traces.json` with traces from gpt-oss-120b.

2. **GPU Requirements**: 
   - Minimum: A100 40GB (for QLoRA training)
   - Recommended: A100 80GB or H100 80GB

3. **Install Dependencies** (using uv):
   ```bash
   # Install uv if you don't have it
   curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
   
   # Sync dependencies
   uv sync
   
   # Optional: Flash Attention 2 for faster training
   uv pip install flash-attn --no-build-isolation
   
   # Optional: Weights & Biases for experiment tracking
   uv sync --extra wandb
   ```

## Usage

### Quick Start

```python
from finetune_trinity import main

# Run the full training pipeline
main()
```

### Step-by-Step

```python
from finetune_trinity import (
    load_and_filter_traces,
    prepare_dataset,
    load_model_and_tokenizer,
    create_lora_config,
    create_training_config,
    train,
)

# 1. Load and filter traces
traces = load_and_filter_traces(
    "../reasoning_traces.json",
    require_correctness=True,
    require_fast_0=True,
    require_fast_1=False,  # Optional
    require_fast_2=False,  # Optional
)

# 2. Prepare dataset
dataset = prepare_dataset(traces)

# 3. Load model with quantization
model, tokenizer = load_model_and_tokenizer()

# 4. Configure LoRA
lora_config = create_lora_config()

# 5. Configure training
training_config = create_training_config()

# 6. Train!
trainer = train(model, tokenizer, dataset, training_config, lora_config)
```

### Inference with Finetuned Model

```python
from finetune_trinity import inference

result = inference("""
import torch

def softmax(x, dim=-1):
    x_max = x.max(dim=dim, keepdim=True)[0]
    exp_x = torch.exp(x - x_max)
    return exp_x / exp_x.sum(dim=dim, keepdim=True)
""")

print(result)
# Output: <think>reasoning...</think><triton>kernel code...</triton>
```

## Filtering Logic

The script applies the following filters to ensure training quality:

| Filter | Requirement | Purpose |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `correctness` | **Must be True** | Kernel output matches PyTorch reference |
| `fast_0` | **Must be True** | Same as correctness - baseline requirement |
| `fast_1` | Optional | Kernel is faster than PyTorch (speedup > 1.0) |
| `fast_2` | Optional | Kernel is 2x faster (speedup >= 2.0) |

### Why these criteria?

1. **correctness + fast_0 = Minimum bar**: The kernel must produce correct output. An incorrect kernel, no matter how fast, is useless.

2. **fast_1 is optional**: We want the model to learn the *reasoning* process first. Speed optimization can come later through RL refinement.

3. **fast_2 is optional**: Only ~10-20% of kernels achieve 2x speedup. Requiring this would filter out too much training data.

## Configuration

Key hyperparameters in `finetune_trinity.py`:

```python
# Model
MODEL_NAME = "arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini"  # 26B MoE, 3B active
MAX_SEQ_LENGTH = 4096

# Training
LEARNING_RATE = 2e-4
BATCH_SIZE = 1
GRADIENT_ACCUMULATION_STEPS = 8
NUM_EPOCHS = 3

# LoRA
LORA_R = 64
LORA_ALPHA = 128
LORA_DROPOUT = 0.05
```

## Output

After training, the model is saved to `./trinity-triton-sft/` with:
- LoRA adapter weights
- Tokenizer configuration
- Training logs (TensorBoard)

To use the finetuned model:

```python
from peft import AutoPeftModelForCausalLM
from transformers import AutoTokenizer

model = AutoPeftModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("./trinity-triton-sft")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("./trinity-triton-sft")
```

## Next Steps

After SFT training:

1. **Evaluate**: Test on held-out KernelBench Level 3+4 problems
2. **RL Refinement**: Use the SFT checkpoint as the base for GRPO/PPO training
3. **Merge Weights**: Optionally merge LoRA weights into base model for faster inference

## Inference Server Deployment

The `trinity_inference.py` script deploys a FastAPI server on Modal with OpenAI-compatible endpoints.

### Setup

1. **Copy environment file**:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env with your configuration
   ```

2. **Deploy the server**:
   ```bash
   modal deploy trinity_inference.py
   ```

3. **Test the deployment**:
   ```bash
   # Health check
   curl https://<your-modal-url>/health

   # Run test function
   modal run trinity_inference.py::test
   ```

### Endpoints

After deployment, you'll have three endpoints:

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/generate` | POST | Simple PyTorch → Triton conversion |
| `/v1/chat/completions` | POST | OpenAI-compatible chat API |
| `/health` | GET | Health check |

### Usage Examples

**Simple Generation:**
```bash
curl -X POST https://<your-modal-url>/v1/generate \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "pytorch_code": "def relu(x): return torch.maximum(x, torch.zeros_like(x))",
    "temperature": 0.7
  }'
```

**OpenAI-Compatible Chat:**
```bash
curl -X POST https://<your-modal-url>/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "trinity-triton-sft",
    "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Convert this PyTorch code to Triton: def softmax(x): ..."}],
    "temperature": 0.7,
    "max_tokens": 2048
  }'
```

**Modal CLI Client:**
```bash
# Default example (softmax)
modal run trinity_inference.py::client

# Custom code
modal run trinity_inference.py::client --prompt "def gelu(x): return x * 0.5 * (1 + torch.tanh(...))"

# With deployed URL
modal run trinity_inference.py::client --url "https://<your-modal-url>"
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `MODAL_VOLUME_NAME` | Modal volume name with checkpoints | `arcee-vol` |
| `VOLUME_MOUNT` | Mount path inside container | `/vol` |
| `CHECKPOINT_PATH` | Path to LoRA checkpoint | `/vol/models/trinity-triton-sft/checkpoint-40` |
| `BASE_MODEL` | Base model name | `arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini` |
| `MODEL_NAME` | Model name in API responses | `trinity-triton-sft` |

### Technical Notes

- **Why PEFT instead of vLLM?** vLLM doesn't support LoRA on MoE expert layers (`gate_proj`, `up_proj`, `down_proj`). The `merge_and_unload()` approach corrupts MoE weights. PEFT inference is the only working solution.
- **GPU**: Uses A100-80GB for the 26B MoE model with 4-bit quantization
- **Auto-scaling**: `min_containers=0` with 5-minute scaledown window

## References

- [AGENTS.md](../AGENTS.md) - Full project documentation
- [TRL SFTTrainer](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/sft_trainer) - HuggingFace TRL documentation
- [PEFT LoRA](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/task_guides/lora_based_methods) - Efficient finetuning
- [arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini](https://huggingface.co/arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini) - Model card

Commit message:

Set up SGLang serving for Arcee Trinity-Mini with LoRA support, clean up project structure, and update documentation

sft-reasoning/README.md, after:

# SFT Reasoning: Finetuning Trinity-Mini on Triton Traces

This folder contains the script for finetuning the `arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini` model on verified reasoning traces for PyTorch → Triton kernel translation.

## Overview

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         INPUT: Reasoning Traces                        │
│                                                                         │
│  Source: gpt-oss-120b generating Triton kernels from PyTorch           │
│  Format: PyTorch → <think>reasoning</think> → Triton                   │
│  Quality: Verified correct AND compiled on Modal H100                  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                    │
                                    ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      FILTERING CRITERIA                                 │
│                                                                         │
│  ✅ correctness == True    (kernel output matches reference)           │
│  ✅ fast_0 == True          (kernel compiles & produces correct output) │
│  ⬜ fast_1 (optional)       (speedup > 1.0 - nice to have)             │
│  ⬜ fast_2 (optional)       (speedup >= 2.0 - nice to have)            │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                    │
                                    ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                         SFT TRAINING                                    │
│                                                                         │
│  Model:    arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini (26B MoE, 3B active)                  │
│  Method:   QLoRA (4-bit quantization + LoRA adapters)                  │
│  Format:   Conversational (User: PyTorch, Assistant: Think + Triton)  │
│  Trainer:  SFTTrainer from HuggingFace TRL                             │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Files

| File | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `finetune_trinity.py` | Main finetuning script (Jupyter notebook style) |
| `pyproject.toml` | Python dependencies (uv) |
| `README.md` | This file |

## Prerequisites

1. **Generate Traces**: Run the orchestrator to generate reasoning traces:
   ```bash
   cd ..
   python orchestrator.py
   ```
   This creates `reasoning_traces.json` with traces from gpt-oss-120b.

2. **GPU Requirements**: 
   - Minimum: A100 40GB (for QLoRA training)
   - Recommended: A100 80GB or H100 80GB

3. **Install Dependencies** (using uv):
   ```bash
   # Install uv if you don't have it
   curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
   
   # Sync dependencies
   uv sync
   
   # Optional: Flash Attention 2 for faster training
   uv pip install flash-attn --no-build-isolation
   
   # Optional: Weights & Biases for experiment tracking
   uv sync --extra wandb
   ```

## Usage

### Quick Start

```python
from finetune_trinity import main

# Run the full training pipeline
main()
```

### Step-by-Step

```python
from finetune_trinity import (
    load_and_filter_traces,
    prepare_dataset,
    load_model_and_tokenizer,
    create_lora_config,
    create_training_config,
    train,
)

# 1. Load and filter traces
traces = load_and_filter_traces(
    "../reasoning_traces.json",
    require_correctness=True,
    require_fast_0=True,
    require_fast_1=False,  # Optional
    require_fast_2=False,  # Optional
)

# 2. Prepare dataset
dataset = prepare_dataset(traces)

# 3. Load model with quantization
model, tokenizer = load_model_and_tokenizer()

# 4. Configure LoRA
lora_config = create_lora_config()

# 5. Configure training
training_config = create_training_config()

# 6. Train!
trainer = train(model, tokenizer, dataset, training_config, lora_config)
```

### Inference with Finetuned Model

```python
from finetune_trinity import inference

result = inference("""
import torch

def softmax(x, dim=-1):
    x_max = x.max(dim=dim, keepdim=True)[0]
    exp_x = torch.exp(x - x_max)
    return exp_x / exp_x.sum(dim=dim, keepdim=True)
""")

print(result)
# Output: <think>reasoning...</think><triton>kernel code...</triton>
```

## Filtering Logic

The script applies the following filters to ensure training quality:

| Filter | Requirement | Purpose |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `correctness` | **Must be True** | Kernel output matches PyTorch reference |
| `fast_0` | **Must be True** | Same as correctness - baseline requirement |
| `fast_1` | Optional | Kernel is faster than PyTorch (speedup > 1.0) |
| `fast_2` | Optional | Kernel is 2x faster (speedup >= 2.0) |

### Why these criteria?

1. **correctness + fast_0 = Minimum bar**: The kernel must produce correct output. An incorrect kernel, no matter how fast, is useless.

2. **fast_1 is optional**: We want the model to learn the *reasoning* process first. Speed optimization can come later through RL refinement.

3. **fast_2 is optional**: Only ~10-20% of kernels achieve 2x speedup. Requiring this would filter out too much training data.

## Configuration

Key hyperparameters in `finetune_trinity.py`:

```python
# Model
MODEL_NAME = "arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini"  # 26B MoE, 3B active
MAX_SEQ_LENGTH = 4096

# Training
LEARNING_RATE = 2e-4
BATCH_SIZE = 1
GRADIENT_ACCUMULATION_STEPS = 8
NUM_EPOCHS = 3

# LoRA
LORA_R = 64
LORA_ALPHA = 128
LORA_DROPOUT = 0.05
```

## Output

After training, the model is saved to `./trinity-triton-sft/` with:
- LoRA adapter weights
- Tokenizer configuration
- Training logs (TensorBoard)

To use the finetuned model:

```python
from peft import AutoPeftModelForCausalLM
from transformers import AutoTokenizer

model = AutoPeftModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("./trinity-triton-sft")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("./trinity-triton-sft")
```

## Next Steps

After SFT training:

1. **Evaluate**: Test on held-out KernelBench Level 3+4 problems
2. **RL Refinement**: Use the SFT checkpoint as the base for GRPO/PPO training
3. **Merge Weights**: Optionally merge LoRA weights into base model for faster inference

## Inference Server Deployment

The `trinity_inference.py` script deploys a FastAPI server on Modal with OpenAI-compatible endpoints.

### Setup

1. **Copy environment file**:
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env with your configuration
   ```

2. **Deploy the server**:
   ```bash
   modal deploy trinity_inference.py
   ```

3. **Test the deployment**:
   ```bash
   # Health check
   curl https://<your-modal-url>/health

   # Run test function
   modal run trinity_inference.py::test
   ```

### Endpoints

After deployment, you'll have three endpoints:

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/generate` | POST | Simple PyTorch → Triton conversion |
| `/v1/chat/completions` | POST | OpenAI-compatible chat API |
| `/health` | GET | Health check |

### Usage Examples

**Simple Generation:**
```bash
curl -X POST https://<your-modal-url>/v1/generate \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "pytorch_code": "def relu(x): return torch.maximum(x, torch.zeros_like(x))",
    "temperature": 0.7
  }'
```

**OpenAI-Compatible Chat:**
```bash
curl -X POST https://<your-modal-url>/v1/chat/completions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "model": "trinity-triton-sft",
    "messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Convert this PyTorch code to Triton: def softmax(x): ..."}],
    "temperature": 0.7,
    "max_tokens": 2048
  }'
```

**Modal CLI Client:**
```bash
# Default example (softmax)
modal run trinity_inference.py::client

# Custom code
modal run trinity_inference.py::client --prompt "def gelu(x): return x * 0.5 * (1 + torch.tanh(...))"

# With deployed URL
modal run trinity_inference.py::client --url "https://<your-modal-url>"
```

### Environment Variables

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `MODAL_VOLUME_NAME` | Modal volume name with checkpoints | `arcee-vol` |
| `VOLUME_MOUNT` | Mount path inside container | `/vol` |
| `CHECKPOINT_PATH` | Path to LoRA checkpoint | `/vol/models/trinity-triton-sft/checkpoint-40` |
| `BASE_MODEL` | Base model name | `arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini` |
| `MODEL_NAME` | Model name in API responses | `trinity-triton-sft` |

### Technical Notes

- **Why SGLang instead of vLLM?** SGLang fully supports LoRA adapters on MoE (Mixture-of-Experts) layers including `gate_proj`, `up_proj`, and `down_proj`, which is critical for Trinity-Mini's 26B MoE architecture. vLLM does not support LoRA on MoE expert layers, and using `merge_and_unload()` corrupts MoE weights.
- **GPU**: Uses H100-80GB for the 26B MoE model with LoRA adapters
- **Auto-scaling**: `min_containers=0` with 5-minute scaledown window

## References

- [AGENTS.md](../AGENTS.md) - Full project documentation
- [TRL SFTTrainer](https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/sft_trainer) - HuggingFace TRL documentation
- [PEFT LoRA](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/task_guides/lora_based_methods) - Efficient finetuning
- [arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini](https://huggingface.co/arcee-ai/Trinity-Mini) - Model card
